Now last but not least, let me show one totally optional optimization or restructuring in the code.
Right now, I access the DOM here in showTooltip when I append my tooltipContainer and in
hideTooltip when I remove it and there is nothing wrong with it
and for a web component as simple as this one, this might actually be the best way of doing it but it's
also worth looking at a pattern which you see from time to time and which I at least want to get you
thinking about.
You can add a method in your class as we did it before,
let's say we call it _render, the name is totally up to you though,
it's not a reserved name,
I just want to make sure it's private to really make clear that we only call it from inside this class
and I name it render because this should be a method which is responsible for updating the DOM.
So what I now will do is I will go up to my constructor and add a new property, this _tooltipVisible
and I'll set it to false initially,
so initially this should not be visible.
Now of course we're not using this property yet.
I want to use that in the render method
now, here I'll check if this.tooltipVisible is true
and if it is true, then I want to create and append this element. So here,
I'll go there,
copy that code and append this child, else
I will execute the code for removing the child.
Let me grab that and paste it in there.
This also means that the tooltipContainer now can be converted back to a constant that only exists
in the render method
because I don't access it anywhere else.
So I can go up there, remove the tooltipContainer in my constructor and in the render method, I'll simply
add a new variable with let tooltipContainer and I'll then simply initialize it here, set its text
content here and add it here in the end
or remove it here.
For this, I'll just check if tooltipContainer is defined and I only try to remove it if it is defined
otherwise
if this was undefined still and we somehow would end up here, we would face a problem.
Now with the render method defined in showTooltip, all I have to do is I have to switch the tooltipVisible
property to false, to true,
excuse me
and then execute the render method again
because in there, I will then have all the logic for checking tooltipVisible and adding the container.
And in hideTooltip I'll do the opposite, I'll set tooltipVisible to false and then execute the
render method.
Now what's the idea behind this approach?
Well the more and more logic you add, maybe you also render other things in your component at some point
of time,
the more sense it makes to do all that rendering in a central place, so that you quickly can have a look
at all your rendering related code in one place instead of having different parts of rendering, different
parts of your DOM distributed throughout your component.
Instead now we know in the render method, we have all the logic for accessing our shadow DOM and for
adding our tooltipContainer in this case
but if we had any other things we wanted to render, we would do it in there too
and so we could always quickly see what we're doing with our DOM in our component. And all the other
places and all the other methods of our component are only responsible for updating data which is then
getting used in render to update the DOM correctly, like we're using tooltipVisible to update the DOM
correctly by either adding or removing our tooltipContainer and we're only setting the data here and then
of course we always have to call render when we know that we changed something that should trigger a
re-render.
We can also call render initially here, even though we don't require it for this component but we can
call it initially here
in the connectedCallback to say, hey when this component gets loaded for the first time, we also want
to render it for the first time.
Now if I reload here, this of course has no special effect because we don't show the tooltip because initially,
we have the tooltipVisible state is set to false but we do render it as soon as I hover over this.
Now it's not getting removed any more, if I hover
away, let me quickly check that.
Yes, this makes sense,
this check here and also the way we remove this will not work. tooltipContainer
always get re-initialized to an empty, to an undefined variable when render gets called, the old
state is
of course not carried over,
so this will not be set
if we call render after changing tooltipVisible to false.
So what I should do instead is I should initialize this with my loaded tooltipContainer if available,
so I will simply access my shadow root here
and there, I'll query for either a div because I know my tooltipContainer will be the only div
or of course you could also assign a class to our tooltipContainer to query by that or an ID.
But here I'll do it by this
and now if this is set, then I can remove it
and I do load it whenever render is called.
So with this change in place, if I now reload this,
still everything works,
no errors here.
If I hover over this, it gets shown and
I can hover away and this now all works with this central render method.
Again, not something we need so much for this trivial component but the more complex your components get, the
more different parts of your shadow DOM you might be updating, the more sense it makes to do all this
updating in one central place where you can then quickly see all your updating logic instead of having
it distributed across your entire component and all the methods in your component.